---
layout: post
category: articles
title: "Penelope Umbrico: A Proposal and Two Trades, to start"
date: 2015-09-05
author: Kate Palmer Albers
thumbnail: umbrico_proposal_01.jpg
platform:
 - The Selfie
theme:
 - "Performance/Self-Reference"
---
A few months ago, the New York-based artist Penelope Umbrico started an Instagram feed devoted to her project, “A Proposal and Two Trades,” which was initially conceived in the summer of 2013 at the Alt+ 1000 Festival de Photographie, a biennial event in the Swiss Alps village of Rossinière. The social media site’s continuous stream of images struck me as a natural home for this project, a perfect example of an artist taking seriously both the possibilities and parameters of a currently popular platform, and, in a particularly mobile manner, extending the project’s commitment to moving images through material and immaterial spaces, touching a range of strangers and audiences along the way. 

 “A Proposal and Two Trades” is as elegantly simple as its title suggests yet the project reveals the complexity of how we read, make, exchange, consume, and circulate photographic images today, both as everyday practice and into artworld circles. It is a complexity that largely goes unnoticed as our habits slowly shift to accommodate the vast changes in casual image making over the last decade. But by breaking it down into collaborative components that appear over time in a variety of viewing venues, “A Proposal and Two Trades” neatly embodies the particular nuances of our contemporary image-scape.

I had the privilege of seeing the project in its early, unformed stages, upon Umbrico’s return to her studio in Brooklyn after the project’s initial rollout in the summer festival. With characteristic enthusiasm, Umbrico pulled out her phone and began scrolling through a “roll” of images (noting the anachronistic language that is habitually infused through digital image making). The roll was gorgeous: warm reds, oranges and yellows mixed in with the green and blue of mountains and sky, brilliant light leaks and sun spots adding to the saturated warmth, as images that were inverted, broken into geometric sections, and repeated scrolled past. The whole and seemingly endless scroll was illuminated with the particular glow of today’s omnipresent iPhone, the backlit glass screen enhancing the sunny glow of the images. I was smitten, and couldn’t imagine a better way to view the work. Seeing them there on the small screen seemed the perfect venue for a project about mobility, exchange, and the visual, emotional, and psychological effects of our intimately handheld devices on viewing images today.

Of course, Umbrico is smarter than I am about how her images should be viewed, and watching the series unfold (itself part of her larger project, *Range*) over the past two years has shown the on-the-phone-feed to be just one iteration of a many-faceted series that appears in multiple venues and multiple material and (for lack of a better word) “immaterial” forms. Each piece has its own brilliance, and the whole is distinctly more than the sum of the parts as a viewer is led to consider the movement of images today through physical and digital spaces, the newly possible exchanges among strangers that our culture’s technologies allow and suggest, and the uncomfortable edges of the art world market and the less-commodifiable exchanges these deeply corporate devices and platforms enable. 

Like the “Suns (from Sunsets) on Flickr” series (2006-present), for which she is justifiably known and that I have written about elsewhere, “A Proposal and Two Trades” is a project that is endlessly mutable in a way that enhances, rather than detracts from, the overall impact of the work. Extracting a bit here, inserting it there, printing more or less, adding as the supply grows and grows: it is an artistic process that mirrors the way photographic images move through space today, multiplying, retracting, becoming aligned, unaligned, or realigned with old and new contexts, occasionally drifting off into digital space and sometimes becoming harnessed again, while other times becoming forgotten, slumped into the massive caches of photographs seen-and-forgotten. While many image-authors find these movements terrifying, distressing, or simply illegal, there is a kind of beauty to it, a humanity in the collective identification and shared desire.

Umbrico had posted her proposal at the festival, in a gallery overlooking the Alps. It addresses a visitor directly:

> I propose that we look at the mountain in front of us together. Not as individual authors making unique pictures (that may or may not be printed), but as a collective group looking together, acknowledging that we use the same common smart-phone image technologies, and are acquainted with the same iconic images– some of which, probably, are of this very mountain. Images taken with smart-phone cameras, live between devices, between material, between people - forever migrating from one place to another, they are no place. With respect to the beauty and stability of this particular mountain, I propose that we offer to our common imaging tool a chance to dialogue with its ancient antithesis.

It is worth noting that by looking at the mountain “together”, by the subsequent parameters of the proposal, Umbrico means what many people would consider “apart”. There is, currently, a cultural uncertainty about what constitutes “together” and “not together,” a seeming contradiction evoked, by Sherry Turkle’s book title, *Alone Together* (2011), which suggests a sad condition of our culture’s state: imagine the recent (but already tired) photographic trope of a family all sitting together, each member focused on his or her individual screen (laptop, tablet, phone, etc). But Umbrico’s formulation thankfully rejects this new knee-jerk critique and usefully formulates the state of being distant and the state of being together as one and the same when joined by a communal process of shared looking.

The first part of the trade began with an invitation to visitors to email the artist their photographs of the mountains and, specifically, that the image go straight from their phone to hers. Umbrico continued, in the proposal, that upon receipt, “I will direct it through my smart-phone camera apps with their host of digitally simulated analogue photo filters”. Umbrico defined the first “trade” as, “a trade between the original photograph of a mountain and a new construct of that mountain produced through digital ideas about analogue photography.” The production, in other words, of this first trade was not just a collaboration between the festival visitor and Umbrico, but a trade conceptualized as one taking place between the initial digital photograph and the filters in the app. It was a “trade”, then, in which the makers of the filters and even the growing photographic culture of “digital ideas about analogue photography” that produced the filter were the active participants in the trade. 

In a remarkable display of modesty (or, alternatively, an absurd abdication of authorial control) Umbrico writes of the next stage of the process:  “….The camera app will give me back its digitally infused mountain”.  With this line, Umbrico references an entire history of debate about the relationship in photography between, on the one hand, mechanized and automatic production and, on the other, an artist’s authorial control. The very questions that animated the confused beginning of the photographic medium are summoned here, but rather than pointing to a nineteenth century rift between the painter’s labor vs. a photographer’s lack thereof, the viewer must consider the authorial contributions of not just artist and unknown human collaborator, but the app makers, filter designers, and automated algorithmic patterns necessary for the subsequent image production. 

The second trade seems straightforward by comparison: “I will send you this new mountain.” In its new iteration, “this new mountain” has been produced through digital ideas about analogue photography and made mobile (again). And, yet, such an act is not a particularly straightforward gesture when it comes from an artist to a viewer. Indeed, it brings up a multitude of questions about the status of the digital versus the printed image, and the market for an image now authored (or at least co-authored) by a respected contemporary artist. 

The sequence of “I will send you this new mountain” goes as follows: After saving the image file of the new mountain with the name of the email address from which it emerged, Umbrico emails it back to the originating phone (though, of course, the maker/recipient may choose to open it on her computer and break the mobile smartphone circuit of exchange that Umbrico envisions). With the creation of the Instagram account, nearly two years into the project, she also uploads the transformed image onto a publicly viewable account, tagging her collaborator with either a username or hashtag. Initially, then, prior to the Instagram account, the exchange remained, at this point, a private one between an artist and – most often – a stranger. Now, other viewers (other strangers) may watch the processed images as they emerge, rolling off the filter production line, as it were. 

The viewer/collaborator, wherever she or he may be, is then invited to print out two copies of the new file, in any material form they choose, and mail one back to the artist along with a self-addressed and stamped envelope in which to receive a certificate of authenticity for this new print edition of 2, now titled “Mountains, Moving: A Proposal and Two Trades”. Umbrico received, altered, and emailed back 659 images of the mountain in Switzerland; a small percentage of these will become part of this next series based entirely on the choice to continue participating among initial festival contributors. The initially immaterial exchange takes unpredictable material form, and can then be exhibited by either party or bought and sold according to the conventions of the art market. Umbrico, for her part, exhibited the new images  at the 2015 Alt+ Festival, returning their new material forms to the place and space of their initial starting points.

It is notable, but perhaps not surprising, that the print edition is limited and accompanied by a certificate of authenticity while the digital iteration has no such stated parameters. Though the image may move freely through digital space, materiality, in a way, slows it down; the mountain is thus restabilized, at least momentarily, before drifting into its two new, and divergent, futures.








